Introduction
------------

A while ago, I worked on a product where part of the effort involved
turning math equations into code. At the time, I wasn't the person who
was allocated the role, so my guess is the code was written by simply
taking the equations from word and translating them by hand into C\#.
All well and good, but it got me thinking: is there a way to automate
this process so that human error can be eliminated from this, admittedly
boring, task? Well, turns out it is possible and that's what this
article is about.

Equations, eh?
--------------

I'd guess that barring any special math packages (such as Matlab), most
of us developers get math requirements in Word format. For example, you
might get something as simple as this:

This equation is easy to program. Here, let me do it:
`y = a*x*x + b*x + c;` However, sometimes you end up getting *really*
nasty equations, kind of like the following:

![](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/e3d5b03a42b3af7092026a7763135d901638618a)
from
[Wikipedia: Equation of state](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Equation_of_state). Anyways,
you should be getting the point by now: the above baby is a bit too
painful to program. I mean, I'm sure if you have an infinite budget or
access to very cheap labour you could do it, but I guarantee you'd get
errors, since getting it right every time (if you've got a hundred) is
difficult.

So my thinking was: hey, there ought to be a way of getting the equation
data structured somehow, and then you could restructure it for C\#.
That's where MathML entered the picture.

MathML
------

Okay, so you are probably wondering what this
[MathML](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MathML) beast is. Basically, it's
an XML-like mark-up language for math. If all browsers supported it,
you'd be seeing the equations above rendered using the browser's
characters instead of bitmaps. But regardless, there's one tool that
supports it: Word. Microsoft Word 2007, to be precise. There's a
little-known trick to get Word to turn equations into MathML. You
basically have to locate the equation options...

![](https://i.stack.imgur.com/n8FL1.png)

and choose the MathML option:


Okay, now copying our first equation onto the clipboard will result in
something like the following:

    <mml:math>
      <mml:mi>y</mml:mi>
      <mml:mo>=</mml:mo>
      <mml:mi>a</mml:mi>
      <mml:msup>
        <mml:mrow>
          <mml:mi>x</mml:mi>
        </mml:mrow>
        <mml:mrow>
          <mml:mn>2</mml:mn>
        </mml:mrow>
      </mml:msup>
      <mml:mo>+</mml:mo>
      <mml:mi mathvariant="italic">bx</mml:mi>
      <mml:mo>+</mml:mo>
      <mml:mi>c</mml:mi>
    </mml:math>

You can probably guess what this all means by looking at the original
equation. Hey, we just ripped out the structure of an equation! That's
pretty cool, except for one problem: converting it to C\#! (Otherwise
it's meaningless)

Syntax Tree
-----------

Keeping data the way we get it is no good. There's lots of extra
information (like that italic statement near bx) and there's info
missing (like the multiplication sign that ought to be between b and x).
So our take on the problem is turn this XML structure into a more OOP,
XML-like structure. In fact, that's what the program does – it turns XML
elements into corresponsing C\# classes. In most cases, XML and C\# hava
a 1-to-1 correspondance, so that an `<mi/>` element turns into an `Mi`
class. So woo-hoo, without too much effort, we turn XML into a syntax
tree. Now, the tree is imperfect, but it's there. Let us instead discuss
some of the thorny issues that we had to overcome.

**Single/multi-letter variables**. Does 'sin' mean s times i times n or
a variable called 'sin' or the `Math.Sin` function? When I looked at the
equations I had, some of them used multiple letters, some were
single-letter. There's no 'one size fits all' solution as to how to
treat those. Basically, I made this an option.

**The times (×) sign**. If you write ab it might mean a times b. If
that's the case you need to find all locations where the multiplication
has been omitted. On a funny note, there are also different Unicode
symbols used by the times sign in different math editing packages (I was
testing with MathML as well as Word). The end result is that finding
where the multiplication sign is missing is very difficult.

**Greek to Roman.** Some people object to having Greek constants in C\#
code. Hey, I code in UTF-8, so I can include anything, including
Japanese characters and those other funny Unicode symbols. It does mess
up IntelliSense because your keyboard probably doesn't have Greek keys -
unless you live in Greece, that is. Plus, it's a way to very quickly
kill maintainability. So one feature I had to add is turning Greek
letters into Roman descriptions, so that Δ would become `Delta` and so
on. Actually, Delta is a special case because we are so used to
attaching it to our variables (e.g., writing ΔV). Consequently, I added
a special rule for Δ to be kept attached even in cases where all other
variables are single-letter.

**Correctly treating `e`, `π` and `exp`.** Basically, the letter pi (π)
can be just a variable, or it can mean `Math.PI`. Same goes for the
letter e – it could be `Math.E` and in most cases it is. Another, more
painful substitution is exp to `Math.Exp`. Support for all three of
these had to be added.

**Power inlining**. Most people know that `x*x` is faster than
`Math.Pow(x, 2.0)`, especially when dealing with integers. Inlining
powers of X and above is an option in the program. I have seen articles
(can't find the link) where people claim that you lose precision if you
avoid doing it the `Math.Pow` way. I'm not sure though.

There were plenty of other problems in converting from XML to C\#, but
the main idea stayed the same: correctly implement the Visitor pattern
over each possible MathML element, removing unnecessary information and
supplying that information which is missing. Let's look at some
examples.

Examples
--------

Okay, I bet you can't wait to see an actual example. Let's start with
what we had before:

Here is the (somewhat simple) output:

    y=a*x*x+b*x+c;

I omitted the initialization steps for variables that the program also
creates.

Let's look at the more complex equation. Here it is, in case you have
forgotten:

Care to guess what the output of our tool is?

    p = rho*R*T + (B_0*R*T-A_0-((C_0) / (T*T))+((E_0) / (Math.Pow(T, 4))))*rho*rho +
        (b*R*T-a-((d) / (T)))*Math.Pow(rho, 3) +
        alpha*(a+((d) / (t)))*Math.Pow(rho, 6) +
        ((c*Math.Pow(rho, 3)) / (T*T))*(1+gamma*rho*rho)*Math.Exp(-gamma*rho*rho);

Okay, let's do another example just to be sure – this time with a square
root. Here is the equation:

I've turn power inlining off for this one - we don't want the expression
with the root being evaluated twice. Here is the outout:

    a = 0.42748 * ((Math.Pow((R*T_c), 2)) / (P_c)) * 
      Math.Pow((1 + m * (1 - Math.Sqrt(T_r))), 2);

Is this great or what? If you are ever handed a 100-page document full
of formulae, well, you can surprise your client by coding them really
quickly.

Conclusion
----------

I hope you like the tool. Maybe you'll even find it useful. The original project was held on [CodePlex](http://www.codeplex.com/mmlsharp). Since the CodePlex is shutting down, and I find this project really helpful, but I didn't find this project on the original owner [Dmitri Nesteruk](https://github.com/nesteruk)'s repository, so I migrate this project here and trying to make it better.

Oh, and if you liked this project, please star it. Thanks!

# Smurf-IV Modifications
- Fix the links in this page
- Make the MathML library target different frameworks
- Up the version to 1.1.0
- Remove the need for the .net3.5 DLL's to simulate .Net 4 and above classes.
- Add NuGet Distro
- Fix placing a "Star" (Multiply) in front of variable when they are in bracketts. i.e. Math.Sqrt(c*b)
- Tidy-up usages of packages
- Reuse library in included Demo app
- A more unit tests that show the fixes now work.
